JUDY WOODRUFF: Back
to health care now.
At this hour, its fate
remains uncertain.
Republicans have not been
able to muster enough support
among their own ranks.
I spoke to one of them, Senator
James Lankford of Oklahoma,
just shortly before four of his
colleagues said that they'd
vote no without assurances from
the House of Representatives.
I began by asking the senator
if he thinks any version of
the health care bill will pass.
REP.
JAMES LANKFORD (R), Oklahoma:
I do actually, but I don't
think it's the final version.
What we have is the House
will have version, the
Senate will have a version.
Neither of us want it to be the
final version at this point.
It will go to a conference
committee, and we will work
out the differences, and there
will be significant differences
between the House and Senate,
and then bring a final version
out after CBO can score
it sometime in September.
So, CBO has taken about
four weeks to score
just about everything
we put out, so we have
got to be able to give them a
lot more time again to be able
to run through scoring, and
then we will be able to
have that final vote.
So, this week and the next
24 hours is a step again, but
definitely not the final step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in terms
that voters, that a layman
could understand, what is mainly
this legislation going to
consist of as it comes out
of the Senate, do you think?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: So, this
version that will come out, as I
mentioned, is just a step that's
coming out.
It will deal with some basic
things, like the individual
mandate, the employer mandate,
state flexibility in allowing
states to have greater options.
When the Affordable Care Act was
passed, it took all the control
of health care to Washington,
D.C., away from all the states.
And so we want to be
able to return some of
that control back, when
prices were much cheaper
in the time before, when the
Affordable Care Act was passed.
So those will be
the basic elements.
There will be some other
smaller parts to it.
It's basically the employer
mandate, individual
mandate, and state control
vs. federal control.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
know, Senator, Democrats and
even a number of Republicans
are saying what's being called
skinny repeal, which is, I
gather, what you're referring
to...
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... would leave,
what, more than 15 million
Americans without coverage.
Other versions would leave many
more millions without coverage.
Any one of these versions,
we're told, would raise
the cost of premiums.
How do you explain a
vote to support that?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: So,
again, today's vote
is not the final vote.
I understand that.
They're trying to score
something that's not
finished by any means.
So, that's one big piece of it.
The other one is to be able to
look at how CBO scores this.
CBO scores -- they basically
assume that if there is not a
mandate to buy it, most people
won't buy the insurance products
that are put out there under
the Affordable Care Act.
So, literally, there's
nine million people right
now on the exchanges.
They assume 22 million
people won't have insurance
in the days ahead based
on them changing this.
Now, this may seem odd, and it
only works in an economist's
mind, that only nine million
people have it, 22 million
people lose it in that sense.
But here's what's
really going on.
Of the mine million people
that are having it, CBO says,
if they're given the choice
to be able to buy it, many of
the individuals don't want to
buy that product, and they only
buy it because they're
forced to buy that product.
So that's the number
that's sitting out there.
I would also say, in my state,
CBO never saw in their original
estimates when the Affordable
Care Act passed that in my
state the insurance rates would
go up over 200 percent for the
individuals that were
buying their insurance.
So CBO is making their best
guess, but I can assure you they
don't always guess correctly.
No one can really see
into the future on that.
So they're laying out an
economist's view vs. practically
what's actually happening
on the ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
that hospital officials in
Oklahoma have said if one of
the versions of this were to
pass, that they thought it would
be devastating on their ability
to take care of low-income
individuals, whether on
Medicaid or otherwise.
What do you say to them,
the folks in your own state?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Yes,
same thing, Judy.
Obviously, they're looking
at just part of a plan.
And I know that my Democratic
colleagues have been very good
for distributing bits and pieces
of plans and saying here is the
whole plan, without actually
putting the full picture
out there for individuals to be
able to see how the stability
works, how aspects of it
work.
They will just put out and
say, this is going to be a cut
that happens to this particular
area.
What will happen?
Immediately, they respond back,
well, that will be dramatic.
Let me give you a for
instance on Medicaid.
I hear a lot of talk about
how Medicaid goes down in
one of the earlier proposals.
Medicaid actually increases
every year for the next eight
years in that proposal by twice
the rate of inflation, and
then nine years from now it
increases at only the rate of
inflation.
That's put out by my Democratic
colleagues as a big cut in
Medicaid because nine years
from now it doesn't increase
as fast, but every single
year it's increasing, and for
the next eight years
it increases twice
as fast as inflation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, I want
to change the subject and ask
you about the attorney general,
Jeff Sessions.
As you know, President Trump
has been publicly criticizing
him for the last several days,
mainly because the attorney
general recused himself from
the Russia investigation.
What do you make of
the president's public
campaign against him?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Yes, it's
something I would never do.
Obviously, the president
is the president.
He can lead his staff
however he chooses.
But I would never say to my
staff in a public setting
that there is a problem.
If I have a problem with a
staff member, they will sit
down with me in my office and we
will sit down and work it out.
And if we can't work it
out, then they will leave.
But that's something we are
going to work out in private,
not in a public setting.
And, quite frankly, Jeff
Sessions had to recuse himself.
That's something all the legal
counsel in the Department
of Justice, once he joined
as the attorney general,
sat down with him, laid
out the law of the statute.
Everyone looked at it's.
Everyone read it exactly
the same way, that Jeff
needed to recuse himself.
Now, did Jeff understand
that before he got there?
No, I don't think he
did, but once he was in
that spot, sitting down
with all the attorneys,
he understand full well
that he had to do that.
I understand that frustrates
the president, but it was
the right thing to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would
it mean if the president
were to fire the attorney
general or if Jeff
Sessions were to step down
because of this pressure
from the president?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Well, there
would be -- obviously,
the president -- doesn't
have to be just pressure
from the president.
The president chooses who his
staff is, and they all serve at
the pleasure of the president.
So, if any point the president
is uncomfortable with Jeff
Sessions and his leadership, he
can choose to remove him.
That's what the
president does for that.
So, that's not the issue.
The issue is then going
through the process, going
through all of the nomination.
Getting through all that aspect
again starting all over again
and getting someone in will
take months and months.
Right now, the attorney general
is getting a good stride and
dealing with U.S. attorneys
around the country, getting
with his staff, getting on board
with different investigations
that need to be done.
So, I hate to be able to
lose that progress that
is happening right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
would it mean for the
Russia investigation
if that were to happen?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: It
wouldn't change the Russia
investigation at all.
Jeff is completely disconnected
from what is happening in
the Russia investigation.
He's recused himself.
We have had numerous
interactions with
people in the DOJ.
He's not tried to interfere
in that in any way.
That's already in the special
counsel's responsibility.
So, it doesn't change
that investigation at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And,
finally, Senator, the
president's announcement
by Twitter yesterday
that he wants to ban individuals
who are transgender from
serving in the military?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Yes, we're
trying to get additional
details on what he means by
that, the implementation.
Obviously, the Pentagon
was unaware of an
announcement like that.
The Pentagon was already in a
six-month review dealing with
transgenders in the military,
what that means as far as
costs, unit cohesion, deployment
capabilities, what that means.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would
you support the ban?
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Well, again,
I'm waiting for that six-month
review to come back from the
military officials.
We open up our military to
all aspects for any individual
that comes into the military
that wants to be able to serve.
There are unique issues, not
just with a gay soldier or
member of the military, but of
someone who is in transition.
You deal with medical issues.
You deal with a lot of
additional costs and
implementation, what
happens in a unit based
on that, because that's
-- as you know, that's
not a single surgery.
That's a series of
surgeries that happens.
And it's a long time for them
to be away from their unit.
So, there are additional
questions that are there that
are unique to that, whether that
individual should go through
transition before they come
into the military or after.
All of those things are still
up in the air, and the military
is walking through that right
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator
James Lankford of
Oklahoma, we thank you.
SEN.
JAMES LANKFORD: Great.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
continue watching the Senate
as it votes on the health care
measures.
We will be live-streaming
throughout this night
on our Web site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.